CoE: Chain-of-Explanation via Automatic Visual Concept Circuit Description
and Polysemanticity Quantification
Wenlong Yu Qilong Wang * Chuang Liu Dong Li Qinghua Hu
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{ywl 95, qlwang, liuc 09, li dong, huqinghua }@tju.edu.cn
Abstract
Explainability is a critical factor influencing the wide de-
ployment of deep vision models (DVMs). Concept-based
post-hoc explanation methods can provide both global and
local insights into model decisions. However, current meth-
ods in this field face challenges in that they are inflexi-
ble to automatically construct accurate and sufficient lin-
guistic explanations for global concepts and local circuits.
Particularly, the intrinsic polysemanticity in semantic Vi-
sual Concepts (VCs) impedes the interpretability of con-
cepts and DVMs, which is underestimated severely. In this
paper, we propose aChain-of-Explanation (CoE) approach
to address these issues. Specifically, CoE automates the de-
coding and description of VCs to construct global concept
explanation datasets. Further, to alleviate the effect of pol-
ysemanticity on model explainability, we design a concept
polysemanticity disentanglement and filtering mechanism to
distinguish the most contextually relevant concept atoms.
Besides, a Concept Polysemanticity Entropy (CPE), as a
measure of model interpretability, is formulated to quan-
tify the degree of concept uncertainty. The modeling of de-
terministic concepts is upgraded to uncertain concept atom
distributions. Finally, CoE automatically enables linguistic
local explanations of the decision-making process of DVMs
by tracing the concept circuit. GPT-4o and human-based
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CPE and the
superiority of CoE, achieving an average absolute improve-
ment of 36% in terms of explainability scores.
1. Introduction
Deep learning-based vision models have demonstrated out-
standing performance in various visual tasks, owing to the
powerful learning and representation capabilities of deep
neural networks (DNNs) [38, 66]. However, the extreme
complexity of DNNs, while enhancing their performance,
also limits their explainability [53]. Humans are often un-
*Corresponding author. Published in CVPR 2025.
…
…DVM
…
[pizza, iron, boat, circle, water, 
topping, blue, cheese,…]
[pizza, iron, boat, circle, water, 
topping, blue, cheese,…]
[pizza, iron, boat, circle, water, 
topping, blue, cheese,…]
[pizza, iron, boat, circle, water, 
topping, blue, cheese, yellow…]
C1: How to automatically describe 
this concept circuit 
and the global concepts?
C2: Each has so many 
meanings …
Which meaning is 
the Mr. Right ?
Describing
…
Visual Concept (VC)
Global Concept Explanation
Local Explanation: 
Concept Circuit 
Figure 1. Illustration of the integrated process of concept-based
post-hoc XAI methods [46], along with two challenges they face.
aware of the reasons behind the model’s conclusions. This
lack of explainability significantly hinders the wide appli-
cation of deep vision models (DVMs) in critical fields such
as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis [9, 37].
Post-hoc eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) can
enhance the transparency of DVMs without causing degra-
dations in performance [43, 55]. Research in this field
can roughly be divided into local and global XAI methods
[8]. The former explains either specific stages or the entire
decision path with respect to a specific sample, identify-
ing key activated regions or significant semantic concepts
[5, 58, 60]. The latter deciphers the overall behavior of
the DVM in a dataset by concept discovery or visualization
techniques [29, 36, 68]. Among them, concept-based meth-
ods can explain DVMs from both global and local (glocal)
perspectives [3, 6], assuming that each channel or neuron
in a certain layer is responsible for recognizing essential se-
mantic concepts. As shown in Fig. 1, they primarily per-
form one or two of the three operations: decoding Visual
Concepts (VCs) of DVMs, manually constructing global
concept explanation datasets, and providing local concept
circuit explanations for individual samples [18, 21, 35].
Despite the significant progress made in concept-based
explanation research, certain challenges remain, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1. First, the VCs are decoded by manually
1
arXiv:2503.15234v1  [cs.CV]  19 Mar 2025
---PAGE---
identifying and annotating the commonalities of a set of ex-
tracted image patches [3, 35]. These manual methods intu-
itively become ineffective when faced with new scenarios,
new models, and new XAI methods, due to high labor costs,
low efficiency, and the limited cognitive scope of individ-
ual annotators. Second, most methods make a naive as-
sumption: each concept is monosemantic and user-friendly
[42]. However, in practice, VCs encapsulate polyseman-
tic information [30] ( e.g., an average of 13 concept atoms
are coupled per channel in a ResNet152 model), presenting
challenges for the model explanation. Particularly, poly-
semanticity can serve as a metric for evaluating a model’s
interpretability. A higher level of polysemanticity signifies
a broader conceptual space, increasing the risks of select-
ing incorrect semantics and generating deviated explana-
tions. Arbitrary concept selection or presenting them solely
as images without descriptions yields suboptimal explana-
tions [55]. Both visualizations and linguistic explanations
become challenging for humans to comprehend, as it is un-
clear which semantic is actually represented or holds promi-
nence [21]. Although polysemanticity is crucial to XAI,
its systematic quantification and resolution remain unad-
dressed. All of these challenges collectively exacerbate the
difficulty of concept-based explanations for DVMs.
To alleviate this dilemma, we propose a Chain-of-
Explanation (CoE) approach via automatic concept decod-
ing, disentanglement, filtering, description, and polyseman-
ticity quantification. Specifically, CoE first proposes an Au-
tomatic Concept decoding and Description (ACD) method
to construct global concept explanation datasets. It decodes
every VC of key layers through arbitrary advanced XAI
methods. A Large Vision Language Model (LVLM) is uti-
lized to describe the commonalities of the extracted image
patches since the linguistic explanation is more comprehen-
sible than images [55]. As for the polysemantic concepts,
we formulate a Concept Polysemanticity Disentanglement
and Filtering (CPDF) mechanism to disentangle them into
a set of orthogonal concept atoms, along with a Concept
Polysemanticity Entropy (CPE) to quantify their degree of
polysemanticity. In this paper, 13 distinct semantic direc-
tions are prompted, including low-level and high-level se-
mantics, which is much more than previous work ( e.g., 5
in [74]). Within the CPDF, a semantic entailment model
is applied to mitigate the impact of redundant semantics.
After these operations, the modeling of deterministic con-
cepts is upgraded to uncertain concept atom distributions.
When elucidating the local decision-making process, a con-
cept circuit method is utilized to form the basis of an expla-
nation chain, with each node representing a hierarchical set
of essential concepts. Relevant atoms and their interconnec-
tions are contextually filtered and aligned within the chain.
Finally, we consolidate all conceptual information along the
explanation chain to generate linguistic explanations similar
to a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) pipeline [27, 67], leveraging a
Large Language Model (LLM), as shown in Fig. 2. Qualita-
tive and quantitative experiments validate the effectiveness
and the superiority of the CoE approach. The contributions
of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel CoE approach to automatically
and systematically provide concept-based glocal explana-
tions, along with managing the problem of polysemantic-
ity, in a more interpretable natural language format.
• A CPDF mechanism is formulated to handle the hard-
to-interpret polysemantic concepts. To our knowledge,
CPDF is a pioneer tailored to comprehensively disentan-
gle and quantify polysemanticity. It disentangles them
into a set of succinct concept atoms, followed by a filter-
ing function to contextually find the suitable atom as the
explanation node. A CPE score is defined to quantify the
polysemanticity of concepts, which can be utilized as a
metric of the interpretability of concepts or models.
• Both GPT-4o and human-based experiments validate the
superiority of the CoE in automatically constructing
global and local explanations and the effectiveness of
CPE in quantifying concept polysemanticity.
2. Related Work
Research on XAI can be broadly categorized into ad-
hoc model interpretability and post-hoc explanation stud-
ies [55, 70]. The former actively refine DVMs to im-
prove interpretability while also necessitating considera-
tion of a trade-off between performance and interpretability
[10, 40, 47, 54, 71]. The latter explains DVMs passively
without performance decline [7, 13, 29, 58, 60]. Among
these post-hoc efforts, concept-based explanations can pro-
vide glocal insights into DVMs [46]. Literature [74] an-
notated every pixel in special datasets with only 5 kinds
of concepts. The explanation is derived by analyzing the
activation regions of each neuron. MILAN [35] decoded
VCs by calculating the maximum mutual information be-
tween channels and regions, followed by manually summa-
rizing commonalities into 3 sentences. However, defining
concepts solely through activations is insufficient. CRP de-
coded VCs through the relevance value derived from the
deep Taylor decomposition [44], showing more accurate
results than the activation-based methods [3]. The com-
monalities of the VCs were also identified manually, and
one of these commonalities was selected randomly. How-
ever, these methods encounter significant challenges, as dis-
cussed in Sec. 1. In contrast, this paper proposes an auto-
mated concept decoding and description method based on
LVLM, which offers greater flexibility in providing linguis-
tic explanations. The most suitable concepts for interpreta-
tion are contextually selected, showing superior results.
Circuits, as sub-graphs, are proposed to explain the key
decision route of a model [5, 17, 22, 25, 63]. They identify
2
---PAGE---
1. ACD (Global Automatic Concept Description)
DVM 𝓜
Mapping 𝑓
Black
Horse
House
Wren
Sheep
Zebra
𝓣
Disentang. 𝑔 Entail 𝛿
𝓢 𝓓
𝓐∗
Probability
𝓠 𝓗Image 1: [shark, …],
Image 2: [blue, …], 
Image 3: [fish, …], 
Image 4: [water, …], 
…
blue, 
shark, 
water, 
…
𝑝𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒, 
𝑝𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑘, 
𝑝𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟,
…
0.81
2.CPDF (Concept Polysem. Disentangle. & Filter.) 
Disentang. 𝑔
Img Cap.  𝐶(𝑥)
Filter 𝑧
… … … … …
Query (The set of concept atoms can also be queried directly      from the dataset. )
Entropy
XAI 𝐸𝑥
3. CoE for Local Explanation
… …
CoE
CPE
෪𝓐𝓟
∗ , 𝓥𝓟, 𝑪, 𝑮, 𝓜
𝓒
…
Layer
 l
 Layer 
l+
1
𝓟
𝑎6
∗:
[black]
𝓒
A black horse is …
Concept Atom Set 𝒜6
∗ : 
[black, blue, …]
Explain Evaluate
The reasons 
why … are …
Concept Explanation Dataset  (ACD-𝓑𝓜,𝓣)
Figure 2. Outline of the Chain-of-Explanation. It consists of three steps (i.e., ACD, CPDF, and local explanation). Each part utilizes a set
of channels C from M. In the concept circuit, P, lines of different depths and colors represent the magnitude of the relevance.
the highest-activated concepts and then explain the model’s
decision by linking all concepts across the circuit. However,
its interpretability for DVMs is limited due to the lack of
a cohesive, language-based explanatory output. Addition-
ally, the polysemanticity of VCs significantly hinders the
accurate explanation [23, 42], and research in this area re-
mains limited. Some methods attempted to indirectly miti-
gate its impact by predefining principal vectors or subspaces
[25, 36, 49]. The lack of flexible and accurate concept-level
explanations also restricts their adaptability. Literature [42]
analyzed the polysemanticity from an information compres-
sion perspective. Pure [21] alleviated the polysemantic-
ity by clustering and decoupling the circuit route. These
methods, however, lack the ability to simultaneously and
comprehensively quantify, disentangle, and describe poly-
semantic VCs. Their applicability is limited—challenges
that this paper seeks to address, as discussed in Sec. 3.
3. Chain-of-Explanation Approach
In this paper, a CoE approach is proposed to automatically
explain DVMs from both global and local perspectives. It
breaks down the complex reasoning path into a chain of
concept nodes, within which polysemanticity is effectively
managed. As shown in Fig. 2, CoE is composed of three
steps. Step 1: ACD is proposed to automatically construct
global concept descriptive explanation datasets of a given
DVM. Step 2: With the assistance of an LVLM, a CPDF
mechanism is designed to disentangle each original VC into
a set of concept atoms and extract the most suitable atom ac-
cording to the context, making CoE more comprehensible
and flexible. Besides, a CPE score is formulated accord-
ingly to quantify the degree of polysemanticity of concepts.
Step 3: A local explanation chain in a manner akin to a CoT
for the decision-making progress of the DVM is established
based on the dataset, CPDF, concept circuit, and LLMs.
3.1. Automatic Concept Decoding and Description
ACD method is first formulated to automatically and effec-
tively construct databases of global concept descriptions.
Specifically, given an image dataset T and a DVM M re-
quiring evaluation and explanation, we establish an injective
function f between channel set C and visual semantic con-
cept set S by an XAI method Ex, f : C 7→ S. Without loss
of generality, for jth channel cl
j in layer l, Ex extracts a set
of image patches within T that most activate this channel,
named VC sl
j = {In}N , where N is the number of image
patches. Each In highlights certain regions of the original
image, representing the focused concept, as exemplified in
the bottom left part of Fig. 2.
A describing function r is then defined to decipher
{In}N into a set of language descriptions:
D = r({In}N ) ={dm}M , (1)
where M is the number of language descriptions for the cur-
rent channel. Traditionally, r is implemented by manually
and subjectively identifying commonalities within {In}N
[74], while ACD utilizes a powerful LVLM as the describer
3
---PAGE---
with well-engineered prompts. After constructing S, D
and the mapping function f, a concept description dataset
BM,T = {C, S, D, f} is automatically constructed, provid-
ing global linguistic explanations for all VCs of M.
3.2. Managing Polysemantic Concept
VCs of each node within a DVM exhibit polysemantic-
ity, introducing certain deviations in the explanation frame-
work, as shown in Fig. 2. Higher polysemanticity indicates
that the current VC aggregates more semantics, making the
intended representation more ambiguous. Such semantic
uncertainty impedes human comprehension of the concept,
particularly within the CoE, where various concepts must
be understood collectively. Quantifying and solving this
dilemma is difficult and has been underestimated by previ-
ous studies. Under this circumstance, we propose a CPDF
mechanism along with a CPE score to mitigate and quantify
its detriments to the CoE simultaneously.
3.2.1 Polysemantic Concept Decoupling and Filtering
Considering that a polysemous word can be understood as
an aggregation of various distinct meanings, we define a
function g to disentangle the ambiguous VC into a set of
easily understandable linguistic concept atoms:
A =

a1, · · ·, ai, · · ·, aQ	
= g(s), (2)
where Q is the number of the concept atoms. We posit that
each atom represents a view of the current VC s, which
will be activated upon the appearance of the correspond-
ing semantic in the input. Furthermore, given that con-
cept atoms should accurately represent the commonalities
in {In}N and recognizing that this naive disentanglement
function (Eq. 2) does not provide a foundation for quantify-
ing polysemanticity, we refine the function g to disentangle
each image patch In into a set of atoms:
An =

a1
n, · · ·, ai
n, · · ·, aQ
n
	
= g(In, s),
D = {An}N . (3)
We instantiate g by a powerful LVLM ( e.g., GPT-4o
[50]), considering that this is quite an open and complex
problem. g prioritizes disentangling and describing com-
monalities within the VC while analyzing each individual
image. Various commonalities among any certain num-
ber of image patches should be summarized and described
by precise terminologies. These common semantics within
an open scenario are as diverse as they are abundant, un-
folding in countless forms and nuances. Besides, it should
generate specific atoms when any commonalities identified
above do not appear in the current In. Therefore, the art
of prompt engineering prompt-com becomes paramount.
It should provide rules for recognizing commonalities, pos-
sible conceptual directions, and output format control. In
this paper, we prompt 13 high-level and low-level seman-
tical directions that cover the normal concepts encountered
in daily life, including object category, scene, object part,
color, texture, material, position, transparency, brightness,
shape, size, edges, and their relationships. Additionally, the
CoT techniques [27, 67] are introduced. Details of all so-
phisticated prompts are shown in Sec. S2 of the Appendix.
All An are then aggregated into a description atom setA
with all duplicate atoms removed:
A = {A1 ∪ A2 ∪ · · · ∪ AN }
=

a1, · · ·, ai, · · ·, aP 	
,
(4)
where P is the number of concept atoms after deleting the
repeating atoms. Each element in A represents a disentan-
gled monosemantic concept and can be utilized as a node
of the CoE. However, some atoms are semantically equiv-
alent even if they have variant descriptions [24]. In order
to remove semantically redundant atoms, we introduce an
entailment function δ to detect the relations between atoms:
{1, 0, −1} = δ(ai1, ai2), ∀ai1, ai2 ∈ A, (5)
where the responses 1,0,-1 represent entailment, neutral, or
contradiction of the candidates, respectively. We instanti-
ate δ by an NLI model (e.g., DeBERTa model [33]) because
the atom candidates are relatively short and simple that an
NLI model is good enough. Following [24], a bidirectional
entailment check is applied, meaning that one of the candi-
dates will be removed when the response is entailment or
neutral. The first atom is designated as the monoseman-
tic representative of the semantic equivalence set due to the
transitivity between them. The final concept set A∗ only
contains heterogeneous atoms that describe the current VC:
A∗ =
n
a1, · · ·, ai, · · ·, aP ∗ o
. (6)
After disentangling the concept atoms, we define a fil-
tering function z to select an atom a∗ as the most suitable
explanation of current VC with respect to the input x:
a∗
s(x) =z(A∗
s, C(x)). (7)
Some research ignores this step or selects the concept ran-
domly with an implicit assumption that all concepts in A∗
are semantically equivalent [18, 35]. In contrast, we filter
the most suitable atom a∗ based on the context of the CoE.
In particular, z is instantiated by an LLM. C(x) is an image
captioning function utilized for providing contextual infor-
mation. It can be instantiated by a relatively small LVLM
[11, 12] or a professional model [39, 64].
3.2.2 Quantification of Concept Polysemanticity
The polysemanticity of concepts can serve as a metric for
the model’s interpretability. Lower polysemanticity of con-
cepts indicates reduced semantic uncertainty with a more
4